# 2dmodel_pdaf - advanced implementation of tutorial model with PDAF

This directory contains a tutorial model coupled to PDAF. The model uses a 2-dimensional rectangular domain with x- and y-directions and has two fields (`fieldA`, `fieldB`). The model is parallelized with MPI using a domain decomposition in the x-direction. The model dynamics are trivial by shifting the model fields in the positive y-direction. For the data assimilation (DA), the code supports all ensemble-based methods (ensemble Kalman filters, particle filters, hybrid Kalman-nonlinear filter). Similar, but simpler variants of this model are in the PDAF tutorials of the PDAF release (https://pdaf.awi.de/trac/wiki/PdafTutorial).

With the tutorial model, we simulate a real case. The model itself is independent of PDAF and uses its own compile scheme. The online-coupled DA code extends the model. To compile the online-coupled model, its Makefile is extended to also compile the user code for the online coupling, while the PDAF library is compiled separately and just linked to the online-coupled assimilative model. In contrast, the offline-coupled DA code does not directly use the model, and the Makefile is more tightly integrated with the PDAF library. Thus, it uses the compile definitions file from the PDAF release and can also initiate the compilation of the PDAF library.

In the PDAF implementation, we follow the same structure as in real applications with complex models (e.g., FESOM or NEMO). In particular, this variant uses an advanced scheme to handle the fields in the state vector, the netCDF binary file format, and a flexible approach to file operations, which moves more of the case-specific functionality into the reading/writing routine. 

The model setup uses a domain size of 18x36 grid points and fields that are initialized from a sine wave. The true state is rotated by 45 degrees. For the DA, one can either directly read ensemble files or use second-order exact sampling from a covariance matrix file. The ensemble for `fieldA` is generated by rotating a sine wave and varying its wavelength. The ensemble for `fieldB` is generated by shifting the model analogous to the model dynamics. The available input files allow running experiments with ensembles up to 20 states and up to 99 time steps. 

Notes on the model:
* The tutorial model is very simple and without real dynamics. Even though the model uses a 2-dimensional domain, it is practically 1-dimensional (just rotated by 45 degrees). This model allows DA with very small ensembles of at least 3 states. This is far lower than we would use in real cases, but it is useful to perform some experiments on a notebook computer. For real models, one would rather use an ensemble of at least 20 states.
* The ensemble is generated in a systematic way (by rotating the field for the first model field and shifting for the second), which is artificial but helps to demonstrate some effects, e.g., of the localization.
* The model does not read restart files. Thus, one cannot perform a realistic sequence of offline analysis steps. Only a single offline analysis step is done for demonstration.


## Structure of the example codes

The directories containing the model and coupled model-PDAF codes are the following

* 2dmodel/ - contains the pure tutorial model without coupling to PDAF
* offline/ - contains the analysis program for offline-coupled assimilation with PDAF
* online/ - contains the model with online-coupling to PDAF

There is a Makefile in each directory to compile the program. Each directory contains a subdirectory `src/`, which contains the source files. For `online/`, the source code is separated into directories `src/`, holding the model code, and `src_pdaf/` containing the coupling code for PDAF. 

Additional directories are

* generate_covar/ - contains the code for a program generating a covariance matrix file from model outputs. This can be used to initialize an ensemble using second-order exact sampling (activated using '-type_ens_init 2' when running the DA cases). 
* inputs_2fields/ - contains the input files, e.g., observation files and files to provide ensemble states. It also contains the script `pdaf_tutorial_online.py`, which generates the input files.
* plotting/ - contains plot scripts
* test_online/ - contains the script 'run.sh' which shows an example of how to run the online-coupled case in separate directories
* runscripts/ - contains a selection of run scripts to run a series of experiments with and without DA

## Compiling

Generally, the codes in the directory can be compiled outside of the PDAF directory. This is usually the case with real models, where the PDAF library is compiled separately and linked to the assimilative model in the online-coupled case. 

### Dependencies
Compiling the model itself only requires 
- `make`,
- a Fortran compiler (e.g., gfortran),
- an MPI implementation (e.g., OpenMPI),
- and a netCDF library (`libnetf`, `libnetcdff`).

To compile PDAF and couple it to the model (online and offline), additionally
- BLAS and LAPACK implementations (e.g., openblas) are required.

### Compiling the model in 2dmodel/

The model is independent of PDAF. All compiler-specific settings are in `compile_settings.txt`. It is configured for a standard Linux installation, and should be adapted for other cases.
To compile the program `model` use
```
make model
```
(Just executing `make` will show all compile targets.)

### Compiling the online-coupled model in online/

The compilation of `model_pdaf` in the directory online/ is configured analogously to that in 2dmodel/. The Makefile is extended to compile the DA user codes for PDAF and to link the PDAF library to the program. The user code source files are located in `src_pdaf` and are included in the Makefile.

For compiling:
1. Compile the PDAF library separately.
2. Compile the program using
  ```
  make <target> PDAFDIR=<mydir>
  ```
  where
  * `<target>`: the name of the program you would like to compile (`model_pdaf` or `model`)
  * `<mydir>`: The path to the PDAF directory.
    
  Possible names for `<target>` are shown when just running the command line without specifying `<target>`.

### Compiling the offline-coupled DA program in offline/

The compilation of the offline-coupled program is integrated with the compile scheme of PDAF. Thus there is no file `compile_settings.txt`, but the compile specification are tkaen from a file in the directory `make.arch` of PDAF. The Makefile can also compile the PDAF library.

Compile the program `offline_pdaf` with
```
make <target> PDAF_ARCH=<arch> PDAFDIR=<mydir>
```
where
* <target>: the name of the program you would like to compile (`offline_pdaf`)
* <arch>: The name of the make.arch file without .h as in other compilations with PDAF (see files in make.arch/ of PDAF)
* <mydir>: The path to the PDAF directory.
Possible names for <target> are shown when just running the command line without specifying <target>.

### Compiling the program to generate the covariance matrix file in generate_covar/

This program is compiled analogously to the offline_coupled DA progra.  Thus, you can compile the program with
```
make generate_covar PDAF_ARCH=<arch> PDAFDIR=<mydir>
```
with <arch> and <mydir> as before.

## Overview of files

### Input files

the input files are in `inputs_2fields`. These are
* `ensA_XX.nc` and `ensB_XX.nc`: Ensemble files for both fields where `XX` is the ensemble index ranging between 01 and 20. Used to initialize the ensemble for DA or to generate a covariacne matrix file with generate_covar.
* `obsA.nc` and `obsB.nc`: Observation fields for both fields containing all time steps. Read during DA process
* `trueA_stepYY.nc` and `trueB_stepYY.nc`: Files holdign the true model state for both fields, where YY is the time step. Used to compare with to access quality of state estimate (e.g. using `plot_diff.py`)

### Output files

Running the online or offline DA produces a number of output files. There are separate files for the first model field 'A' and the second model field 'B'. Below, we list the file just showing field 'A'
* `stateA_step*_for.txt / stateA_step*_ana.txt` - files holding the ensemble mean of field A of the model for the forecast ('for') or analysis ('ana').
* `ensA_XX_step*_for.txt / ensA_XX_step*_ana.txt` - files holding each single ensemble member state (with index 'XX') for the forecast ('for') or analysis ('ana').
* `varianceA_step*_for.txt / varianceA_step*_ana.txt` - files holding the ensemble variance of field A of the model for the forecast ('for') or analysis ('ana').

## Plotting

The directory `plotting/` contains Python plot scripts. They can be used like
```
plot_diff.py FILE1 FILE2      # Plot the difference of two files and display their RMS difference
plot_file.py FILE             # Plot the field in one file
plot_obs.py OBSFILE STEP      # Plot one observation file with OBSFILE being the observation file and STEP the time step to plot
```

The script `plot_file.py` can be used for plotting the files in inputs_2fields, or output files of the model or a DA experiment. `plot_diff.py` is commonly used to plot the difference of the output of a DA experiments and the corresponding true state.

## Running experiments

The programs for the online and offline coupled DA use command line options to specify options. All command line options start with a dash. Thus the syntax is
```
-VARIABLE VALUE
```

### Running the offline coupled DA

The offline coupled DA performs one single analysis step. It uses a parallelization with domain decomposition. However, one can also run it with a single process.

To run the program one can, e.g., use
```
./offline_pdaf -dim_ens <DIMENS> -filtertype <FTYPE> -step <STEP> [further options]
```
with
* <DIMENS>: Ensemble size, e.g. between 3 and 20.
* <FTYPE>: Type of filter algorithm, e.g. 6 for ESTKF or 7 LESTKF.
* <STEP>: The time step for which observations are assimilated
* [further options]: there are more options one can specify. We list some possibilities later.

Notes: 
* Depending on the MPI-library you use, you might need to write 'mpirun -np 1' at the beginning of the command. With OpenMPI one usually doe snot need this.
* The program is implemented to always read the same input files. Thus it does not support a full offline DA cycling in which one alternates the DA step and the forecast. Thus, in a more realistic case, one would change this so that one can specify at run time which files to read. Alternatively, one could add a script that copies restart files from the model to the default names.

***Examples***

Running the global filter ESTKF with ensemble size 10 at step 1:
```
./offline_pdaf -dim_ens 10 -filtertype 6 -step 1
```
Runing the local filter LESTKF with ensemble size 6 at step 1 with localization cut-off radius 7.0
```
./offline_pdaf -dim_ens 6 -filtertype 7 -step 1 -cradius 7.0
```
Here, the additional option `cradius` is used.

Get an overview of available DA methods and the options of the selected DA method (<FTYPE>):
```
./offline_pdaf -filtertype <FTYPE> -subtype -1
```
If one omits setting 'filtertype' the filter ESTKF is used.


### Running the online coupled DA

The online coupled DA is implemented with PDAF's fully parallel mode. Thus, the number of processes has to be a multiple of the ensemble size.

```
mpirun -np <NUMPROCS> ./model_pdaf -dim_ens <DIMENS> -filtertype <FTYPE> [further options]
```
with
* <DIMENS>: Ensemble size, e.g. between 3 and 20.
* <FTYPE>: Type of filter algorithm, e.g. 6 for ESTKF or 7 LESTKF.
* [further options]: there are more options one can specify. We list some possibilities later.


***Examples***

Running the local filter LESTKF using 6 processes with ensemble size 6:
```
mpirun -np 6./model_pdaf -dim_ens 6 -filtertype 6
```
Runing the local filter LESTKF with parallelization using 12 processes with ensemble size 6
```
mpirun -np 12 ./model_pdaf -dim_ens 6 -filtertype 6
```
In this case, 2 processes per model are used such that the model domain is split into 2 subdomains. The outputs of this run should be the same as before.
However, in the upper part of the screen output, you will see information about the domain decomposition, and the dimension of the fields in the state vector will reflect the decomposition.

To plot the difference of the final state estimate of this experiment with the true model state use
```
python ../plotting/plot_diff.py stateA_step20_ana.txt ../inputs_2fields/trueA_step20.txt
```

***Run Scripts***

The directory `runscripts/` contains run scripts to perform a series fo experiments with the online coupled model. The scripts use some more options. the scripts are.
* run_free.sh: Run a series of ensemble runs without assimilating observations. The type of ensembel initialization and the ensemble size are varied
* run_global.sh: Run a series of DA experiments with the global ESTKF. The experiments vary the type of ensemble initialization, the inflation (forgetting factor) and the ensemble size
* run_local.sh: Run a series of DA experiments with the lcoal filter LESTKF. The experiments vary the type of ensemble initialization, the inflation (forgetting factor), the ensemble size, and the localization radius.

Note, that the run scripts perform a larger number number of experiments, e.g. `run_global.sh` does 378 experiments and `run_local.sh` does 4998 experiments. Both run with ensemble size up to 20 so that up to 20 processes are used. Running these experiments is possible without having physically 20 processor cores, e.g. on a notebook computer with sufficiently powerful processor. If the executation slows down significantly, the CPUr is likely not powerful enough. Further, while each output file is small, the overall output of these experiments is several giga-bytes.

## Run options

Here we list a selection of possible options that cna be set on the command line.

| Option | values | Description | Default |
|--------|--------|-------------|---------|
| dim_ens | >0  | Ensemble size |  |
| filtertype | | Type of DA method; see output from running with -subtype -1| 6 |
| subtype | | subtype of DA method; see output from running with -subtype -1| 0 |
| delt_obs | >0 | forecast length in time steps | 2 |
| forget | >0 | 'forgetting factor' controlling inflation: <1.0 inflates the ensemble spread; =1.0 neutral; >1.0 deflates the ensemble spread | 1.0 |
| cradius | >=0.0 | Localization cut-off radius | 5.0 |
| locweight | 0-4 | Type of localiztion weight function:  (0) constant weight of 1; (1) exponentially decreasing with SRADIUS; (2) use 5th-order polynomial; (3) regulated localization of R with mean error variance; (4) regulated localization of R with single-point error variance| 2 |
| type_ens_init | 1,2,3 | Type of ensemble initialization: 1: Read ensemble files; 2: Read ensemble files and replace ensemble mean by mean state of 20 ensemble files; 3: Initialize from covariance matrix file and use by mean state of 20 ensemble files (need to run generate_covar first) | 1 | 
| twin_experiment | [T\|F] | Wethe rto run a twin experiment, i.e. use observation values generated using PDAF functionality to generate synthetic observations | F |
| step | 0-99 | For offline DA: Time step of observations assimilated | 1 |
| type_iau | 0,1 | Incremental analysis updating: 0: no IAU, 1: activate IAU | 0 |
| steps_iau | >0 | Incremental analysis updating: Number of time steps over which increment is distributed | 1 |
| write_state | [T\|F] | Whether to write ensemble mean state files | T | 
| write_ens | [T\|F]  | Whether to write all ensemble states into files | T |
| write_var | [T\|F|] Whether to write files for ensemble variance field | F |
| assim_A | [T\|F] | Whether to assimilate observation of fieldA | T |
| assim_B | [T\|F] | Whether to assimilate observation of fieldB | F |
| rms_obs_A | >0.o | Observation error for observations of fieldA | 0.5 |
| rms_obs_B | >0.o | Observation error for observations of fieldB | 0.25 |

Further options, including their explanation and possible values, can be seen in the file `assimilation_pdaf_mod.F90`.

## Further functionality

### Generating a covariance matrix file

The program for generating a covariance matrix file is located in the directory `generate_covar/`. The compilation of the program was described before. 

the program can be run using
```
./generate_covar
```
It will read the ensemble files from `inputs_2fields` and perform a singuar value decomposition on these files. Then it write the file `covar.nc` holding the singular values, corresponding singular values, and the ensembl emean state. The program is configures to use 20 ensemble files. 

The directory `generate_covar/` contains a README file with further information.


### Generating synthetic observations for twin experiments

The program for the online coupled DA can generate files holding synthetic observations from a model forecast and later using these files as inputs for twin experiments.
As there are no real observations for this model, the observations files provided in `inputs_2dfields/` are already synthetic observations. To this end, this functionality serves to demonstrate how it is used.

The example is implemented so that, when run in parallel, separate files for each sub-domain are written.
Accordingly, when performing the actual twin experiment (see below), one has to use the same number of processes per model.
The example further assumes that observations are generated for each time step.

The example is further implemented so that synthetic observations can only be generated for one observation type at a time.
Thus, to generate files for each of the two observation types in the example, one has to do two runs.
In each case, one performs the run with ensemble size 1. For running with parallelization using 2 sub-domains:
```
mpirun -np 2 ./model_pdaf -dim_ens 1 -filtertype 100 -delt_obs 1 -write_state F -write_ens F
mpirun -np 2 ./model_pdaf -dim_ens 1 -filtertype 100 -delt_obs 1 -write_state F -write_ens F -assim_A F -assim_B T
```
In the second run, observation type A is deactivated, while observation type B is switched on.
These runs will generate 4 files, i.e., one file for each observation type and sub-domain:
```
obsA_syn_0000.nc, obsA_syn_0001.nc, obsB_syn_0000.nc, obsB_syn_0000.nc
```
Here, the 4-digit number is the process rank that wrote the file.
The observations are written as a list of values. The information about observation locations or errors are initialized by the respective observation module when performing a twin experiment.

Note: The functionality to generate a synthetic observation is only implemented in the example for the online coupled case.

### Performing a twin experiment

When the files holding the synthetic observations have been generated, one can use them in twin experiments.
In this case, each observation module reads the regular observation files to initialize all values.
Then, the file holding the synthetic observations is read, which overwrites the values of the actual observations.

The twin experiments can assimilate any combination of observation types, as long as the necessary files containing the synthetic observations were generated beforehand.

To run the ESTKF with ensemble size 4, assimilating observations of type A, and using 2 processes per model to be consistent with the generated synthetic observation files, one can execute:
```
mpirun -np 8 ./model_pdaf -dim_ens 4 -filtertype 6 -delt_obs 2 -twin_experiment T
```
To run the analogous experiment assimilating synthetic observations of both types, one can execute:
```
mpirun -np 8 ./model_pdaf -dim_ens 4 -filtertype 6 -delt_obs 2 -twin_experiment T -assim_B T
```

Note: One can also perform twin experiments with the offline-coupled case, as long as one has previously generated synthetic observation files with the online-coupled program.
